---
layout: post
title: "Fun With WSE 2.0"
comments: false
date: 2003-09-10 17:06:00
updated: 2004-05-02 09:38:00
categories:
 - Technology
subtext-id: c28c18f5-77f3-414d-828e-e34ca24f03f3
alias: /blog/post/Fun-With-WSE-20.aspx
---


My boss has a demo coming up where he wanted to have a little private wireless network (not Internet connected) and he wanted to be able to send IM-like messages to all of the machines. He wanted the little "piece of toast" popup and to be able to send an arbitrary piece of text and a hyperlink.

Also, I've had a couple of WSE2 articles and MSDN TV downloads in my "To Be Reviewed" folder for a while now... why not use WSE2 to build this IM thingy?

I decided to use the [WSE 2.0 Messaging API](http://msdn.microsoft.com/msdnmag/issues/03/09/xmlfiles/default.aspx), which is very easy to use. You can literally send a message in less than 10 lines...
    
    private void sendButton_Click(object sender, System.EventArgs e)
    {
        Uri destination = new Uri("soap.tcp://" +
            machineNameTextBox.Text + ":8888/WseMessenger");
        SoapSender soapSender = new SoapSender(destination);
        SoapEnvelope envelope = new SoapEnvelope();
        envelope.Context.Action = "Receiver";
        XmlElement body = envelope.CreateBody();
        body.InnerText = messageTextBox.Text;
        soapSender.Send(envelope);
    }
    

Pretty slick eh? Receiving is a little more complicated only in that you need to derive a new class from SoapReceiver:
    
    using Microsoft.Web.Services;
    using Microsoft.Web.Services.Messaging;
    using System;
    public delegate void MessageReceivedEvent( object sender,   
                            SoapEnvelope envelope );
      
    public class MyReceiver : SoapReceiver
    {
        public event MessageReceivedEvent MessageReceived;
        protected override void Receive(SoapEnvelope envelope)
        {
            if( MessageReceived != null )
                MessageReceived( this, envelope );
        }
    }
    

Then from my Receiver Form I just add MyReceiver to the SoapReceivers collection and subscribe to the event:
    
    private void Form1_Load(object sender, System.EventArgs e)
    {
        MyReceiver receiver = new MyReceiver();
        receiver.MessageReceived += 
            new MessageReceivedEvent(receiver_MessageReceived);
        SoapReceivers.Add( "soap.tcp://" + 
            System.Net.Dns.GetHostName() +
            ":8888/WseMessenger", receiver );
    }

Easy as pie! So now the question is... when will WSE 2.0 ship?

PS. This was all moot of course. I came into the office├é this morning and we decided to go with [Microsoft Office Live Communication Server](http://www.microsoft.com/office/preview/livecomm/default.asp) instead. Since we were running on a private little demo network anyway, why not? It was still fun to play around with the Messaging API.

PPS. If you are looking for a "piece of toast" control for C#/.NET, check out [TaskbarNotifier by John O'Byrne](http://www.codeproject.com/cs/miscctrl/taskbarnotifier.asp). It is fully skinnable and very easy to use.
